
=== PAGE 1 ===
BRITS: Bidirectional Recurrent Imputation for Time
Series
Wei CaoŌłŚ
Tsinghua University
Bytedance AI Lab
cao-13@tsinghua.org.cn
Dong Wang
Duke University
dong.wang363@duke.edu
Jian Li
Tsinghua University
lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Hao Zhou
Bytedance AI Lab
haozhou0806@gmail.com
Yitan Li
Bytedance AI Lab
liyitan@bytedance.com
Lei Li
Bytedance AI Lab
lileilab@bytedance.com
Abstract
Time series are ubiquitous in many classi’¼ücation/regression applications. However,
the time series data in real applications may contain many missing values. Hence,
given multiple (possibly correlated) time series data, it is important to ’¼üll in
missing values and at the same time to predict their class labels. Existing imputation
methods often impose strong assumptions of the underlying data generating process,
such as linear dynamics in the state space. In this paper, we propose a novel method,
called BRITS, based on recurrent neural networks for missing value imputation
in time series data. Our proposed method directly learns the missing values in a
bidirectional recurrent dynamical system, without any speci’¼üc assumption. The
imputed values are treated as variables of RNN graph and can be effectively
updated during backpropagation. BRITS has three advantages: (a) it can handle
multiple correlated missing values in time series; (b) it generalizes to time series
with nonlinear dynamics underlying; (c) it provides a data-driven imputation
procedure and applies to general settings with missing data. We evaluate our
model on three real-world datasets, including an air quality dataset, a health-
care dataset, and a localization dataset for human activity. Experiments show
that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in both imputation and
classi’¼ücation/regression.
1 Introduction
Multivariate time series data are abundant in many application areas, such as ’¼ünancial marketing
[5, 4], health-care [ 10, 22], meteorology [ 31, 26], and traf’¼üc engineering [ 29, 35]. Time series
are widely used as signals for classi’¼ücation/regression in various applications of corresponding
areas. However, missing values in time series are very common, due to unexpected accidents, such
as equipment damage or communication error, and may signi’¼ücantly harm the performance of
downstream applications.
Much prior work proposed to ’¼üx the missing data problem with statistics and machine learning
approaches. However most of them require fairly strong assumptions on missing values. We can ’¼üll
the missing values using classical statistical time series models such as ARMA or ARIMA (e.g., [1]).
But these models are essentially linear (after differencing). Kreindler et al. [19] assume that the data
are smoothable, i.e., there is no sudden wave in the periods of missing values, hence imputing missing
ŌłŚWork done while Wei Cao was a research intern at Bytedance AI Lab
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montr├®al, Canada.

=== PAGE 2 ===
values can be done by smoothing over nearby values. Matrix completion has also been used to
address missing value problems (e.g., [30, 34]). But it typically applies to only static data and requires
strong assumptions such as low-rankness. We can also predict missing values by ’¼ütting a parametric
data-generating model with the observations [14, 2], which assumes that data of time series follow the
distribution of hypothetical models. These assumptions make corresponding imputation algorithms
less general, and the performance less desirable when the assumptions do not hold.
In this paper, we propose BRITS, a novel method for ’¼ülling the missing values for multiple correlated
time series. Internally, BRITS adapts recurrent neural networks (RNN) [16, 11] for imputing missing
values, without any speci’¼üc assumption over the data. Much prior work uses non-linear dynamical
systems for time series prediction [9, 24, 3]. In our method, we instantiate the dynamical system as a
bidirectional RNN, i.e., imputing missing values with bidirectional recurrent dynamics. In particular,
we make the following technical contributions:
ŌĆó We design a bidirectional RNN model for imputing missing values. We directly use RNN for
predicting missing values, instead of tuning weights for smoothing as in [10]. Our method
does not impose speci’¼üc assumption, hence works more generally than previous methods.
ŌĆó We regard missing values as variables of the bidirectional RNN graph, which are involved
in the backpropagation process. In such case, missing values get delayed gradients in both
forward and backward directions with consistency constraints, which makes the estimation
of missing values more accurate.
ŌĆó We simultaneously perform missing value imputation and classi’¼ücation/regression of ap-
plications jointly in one neural graph. This alleviates the error propagation problem from
imputation to classi’¼ücation/regression and makes the classi’¼ücation/regression more accurate.
ŌĆó We evaluate our model on three real-world datasets, including an air quality dataset, a
health-care dataset and a localization dataset of human activities. Experimental results show
that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art models for both imputation and classi’¼üca-
tion/regression accuracies.
2 Related Work
There is a large body of literature on the imputation of missing values in time series. We only mention
a few closely related ones. The interpolate method tries to ’¼üt a "smooth curve" to the observations
and thus reconstruct the missing values by the local interpolations [19, 14]. Such method discards
any relationships between the variables over time. The autoregressive method, including ARIMA,
SARIMA etc., eliminates the non-stationary parts in the time series data and ’¼üt a parameterized
stationary model. The state space model further combines ARIMA and Kalman Filter [14, 15], which
provides more accurate results. Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equations (MICE) [2] ’¼ürst
initializes the missing values arbitrarily and then estimates each missing variable based on the chain
equations. The graphical model [20] introduces a latent variable for each missing value, and ’¼ünds
the latent variables by learning their transition matrix. There are also some data-driven methods
for missing value imputation. Yi et al. [ 32] imputed the missing values in air quality data with
geographical features. Wang et al. [ 30] imputed missing values in recommendation system with
collaborative ’¼ültering. Yu et al. [34] utilized matrix factorization with temporal regularization to
impute the missing values in regularly sampled time series data.
Recently, some researchers attempted to impute the missing values with recurrent neural networks
[7, 10, 21, 12, 33]. The recurrent components are trained together with the classi’¼ücation/regression
component, which signi’¼ücantly boosts the accuracy. Che et al. [10] proposed GRU-D, which imputes
missing values in health-care data with a smooth fashion. It assumes that a missing variable can be
represented as the combination of its corresponding last observed value and the global mean. GRU-D
achieves remarkable performance on health-care data. However, it has many limitations on general
datasets [10]. A closely related work is M-RNN proposed by Yoon et al. [33]. M-RNN also utilizes
bi-directional RNN to impute missing values. Differing from our model, it drops the relationships
between missing variables. The imputed values in M-RNN are treated as constants and cannot be
suf’¼üciently updated.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 Preliminary
We ’¼ürst present the problem formulation and some necessary preliminaries.
De’¼ünition 1 (Multivariate Time Series) We denote a multivariate time series X =
{x1, x2,..., xT} as a sequence of T observations. The t-th observation xt Ōłł RD consists
ofD features{x1
t,x 2
t,...,x D
t}, and was observed at timestampst (the time gap between different
timestamps may not be the same). In reality, due to unexpected accidents, such as equipment damage
or communication error, xt may have the missing values (e.g., in Fig. 1, x3
1 in x1 is missing). To
represent the missing values in xt, we introduce a masking vector mt where,
md
t =
{
0 ifxd
t is not observed
1 otherwise .
In many cases, some features can be missing for consecutive timestamps (e.g., blue blocks in Fig. 1).
We de’¼üne╬┤d
t to be the time gap from the last observation to the current timestampst, i.e.,
╬┤d
t =
’Ż▒
’Ż▓
’Ż│
stŌłÆstŌłÆ1 +╬┤d
tŌłÆ1 ift> 1, md
tŌłÆ1 = 0
stŌłÆstŌłÆ1 ift> 1, md
tŌłÆ1 = 1
0 ift = 1
.
See Fig. 1 for an illustration.
Figure 1: An example of multivariate time series with missing values. x1 to x6 are observed at
s1...6 = 0, 2, 7, 9, 14, 15 respectively. Considering the 2nd feature in x6, the last observation of the
2nd feature took place ats2 = 2, and we have that╬┤2
6 =s6ŌłÆs2 = 13.
In this paper, we study a general setting for time series classi’¼ücation/regression problems with missing
values. We use y to denote the label of corresponding classi’¼ücation/regression task. In general, y
can be either a scalar or a vector. Our goal is to predict y based on the given time series X. In the
meantime, we impute the missing values in X as accurate as possible. In another word, we aim to
design an effective multi-task learning algorithm for both classi’¼ücation/regression and imputation.
4 BRITS
In this section, we describe the BRITS. Differing from the prior work which uses RNN to impute
missing values in a smooth fashion [10], we learn the missing values directly in a recurrent dynamical
system [25, 28] based on the observed data. The missing values are thus imputed according to the
recurrent dynamics, which signi’¼ücantly boosts both the imputation accuracy and the ’¼ünal classi’¼üca-
tion/regression accuracy. We start the description with the simplest case: the variables observed at
the same time are mutually uncorrelated. For such case, we propose algorithms for imputation with
unidirectional recurrent dynamics and bidirectional recurrent dynamics, respectively. We further
propose an algorithm for correlated multivariate time series in Section 4.3.
4.1 Unidirectional Uncorrelated Recurrent Imputation
For the simplest case, we assume that for thet-th step,xi
t andxj
t are uncorrelated ifi╠Ė=j (butxi
t may
be correlated with somexj
tŌĆ▓╠Ė=t). We ’¼ürst propose an imputation algorithm by unidirectional recurrent
dynamics, denoted as RITS-I.
In a unidirectional recurrent dynamical system, each value in the time series can be derived by its
predecessors with a ’¼üxedarbitrary function [9, 24, 3]. Thus, we iteratively impute all the variables in
3
