
=== PAGE 1 ===
Frequency-aware Generative Models for Multivariate
Time Series Imputation
Xinyu Yang1, Yu Sun1∗, Xiaojie Yuan1, Xinyang Chen2∗
1College of Computer Science, DISSec, Nankai University, China
{yangxinyu@dbis.,sunyu@,yuanxj@}nankai.edu.cn
2School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
chenxinyang@hit.edu.cn
Abstract
Missing data in multivariate time series are common issues that can affect the
analysis and downstream applications. Although multivariate time series data
generally consist of the trend, seasonal and residual terms, existing works mainly
focus on optimizing the modeling for the first two items. However, we find that the
residual term is more crucial for getting accurate fillings, since it is more related
to the diverse changes of data and the biggest component of imputation errors.
Therefore, in this study, we introduce frequency-domain information and design
Frequency-aware Generative Models for Multivariate Time Series Imputation
(FGTI). Specifically, FGTI employs a high-frequency filter to boost the residual
term imputation, supplemented by a dominant-frequency filter for the trend and
seasonal imputation. Cross-domain representation learning module then fuses
frequency-domain insights with deep representations. Experiments over various
datasets with real-world missing values show that FGTI achieves superiority in
both data imputation and downstream applications.
1 Introduction
Missing data are commonly observed in the multivariate time series due to diverse reasons [ 25],
which would encumber subsequent analysis and applications [ 17]. It is not surprising that more
accurate missing data imputation generally leads to better performance in downstream applications.1
Existing techniques [13; 28] have revealed that time series data can be decomposed into three distinct
terms, i.e., trend, seasonal, and residual, and try to compute an imputation by modeling the first
two items as accurately as possible. Figure 1 reports a survey for the imputation accuracy of the
three terms by representative imputation methods over the pre-decomposed KDD [6] dataset with
10% missing values.2 The dataset comprises 8,034 consecutive readings of meteorological and air
quality data taken over a year in Beijing. In this dataset, the trend term may reflect long-term changes
in climate or air quality conditions, and the seasonal term might capture patterns associated with
different seasons. Moreover, the residual term may consist of short-term, irregular, and high-frequency
changes. As shown in Figure 1, the imputation error is mainly caused by the residual term, which has
not been well studied, unfortunately.
Recent studies indicate that the high-frequency components are intricately related to the residual
[46; 58; 26] and contain critical information for imputing the residual term. Unfortunately, deep
learning architectures cannot generalize well in modeling high-frequency components. [38; 43]. To
∗Corresponding authors.
1Please see an empirical study in Section 4.5.
2Please see Section 2 for a brief survey, see Appendix A.5.1 for detailed experiment setup.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

=== PAGE 2 ===
(a) (b)
Figure 1: Improving the imputation accuracy of the residual term is the key to boosting the imputation
performance of the model.
meet this challenge, we design Frequency-aware Generative Models for Multivariate Time Series
Imputation (FGTI), which can extract frequency-domain information and use two cross-domain
(i.e., time-domain and frequency-domain) representation learning modules to guide the generation
process of deep models. Specifically, we start with the high-frequency filter designed to extract the
high-frequency information essential for guiding the accurate imputation of the residual term. This
choice is consistent with recognizing the critical role of high-frequency information in imputation
accuracy. Then, we introduce the dominant-frequency filter to address the potential challenge
posed by high-frequency information for imputing trend and seasonal terms [4]. Furthermore, our
cross-domain representation learning frameworks combine frequency-domain information with deep
representations in the time-domain, enabling seamlessly intertwining frequency-domain information
with time and attribute dependencies modeling.
Our research makes several notable contributions:
• We design a frequency-aware generative model FGTI with frequency-domain information
integrated by the high-frequency filter and the dominant-frequency filter, to enhance the
awareness of the frequency-domain.
• We introduce two cross-domain representation learning modules that provide models with
prior knowledge of intricate frequency-related patterns for missing data imputation.
• We evaluate FGTI on three time series datasets with real-world missing values, which
demonstrates the superiority of FGTI in both imputation accuracy and downstream applica-
tions.
2 Related work
Traditional imputation methods usually employ the statistics, such as mean value [23], median value
[16], or last observed value [3], to impute missing data for multivariate time series. It is not surprising
that such traditional signals cannot make full use of the valuable semantics of available data. BTMF
[9] and TIDER [28] employ the low-rank matrix factorization to impute missing data. Unfortunately,
due to the matrix capacity’s limitation, it is still challenging to accurately match imputation values
with the underlying complex relationships and dependencies.
Many studies have shown that deep learning based imputation methods are effective to fill multivariate
time series data, such as BRITS [6], TST [57], SAITS [14], STCPA [54], TimesNet [52]. According
to [48], forecasting models [50; 55] can also be applied to imputation task. Additionally, GRIN [12]
and DAMR [39] use graph neural networks to incorporate known relationships between attributes.
However, these methods with fixed model outputs cannot capture the uncertainty and variability of
missing values. Recently, researchers have attempted to utilize large language models (LLMs) as the
backbone for time series analysis [59]. Since there are significant differences between time series
data and natural language, it still has a lot of room for improvement.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
To capture the uncertainty and variability, researchers introduce generative models [8] into the missing
data imputation by learning the implicit distribution of missing values. In the early stage, researchers
mainly use variational Autoencoders (V AE) or generative adversarial networks (GAN) to generate
new samples that match the distribution of the training dataset and impute missing values with the
generated samples. V AE-based methods learn data distributions by optimizing the reconstruction
error and regularizing in the latent space [ 31; 15; 35; 36; 11]. However, they may not capture the
complex variability of missing data well and may produce inaccurate results, especially when the
latent spaces are not well aligned. GAN-based approaches use the adversarial training technique of
the generator and discriminator to improve the imputation results [ 56; 29; 30; 34]. Unfortunately,
they may face convergence difficulties that can affect the imputation accuracy.
Diffusion models have been introduced into the imputation task recently, considering the success in
various fields [40; 18; 24]. To impute time series data, CSDI [44] designs conditional score-based
diffusion models with the conditions only on observed values, and SSSD [2] utilizes both conditional
diffusion models and structured state space models. Additionally, MIDM [ 49] develops the noise
sampling, addition, and denoising mechanisms, and PriSTI [27] further studies the enhanced prior
modeling by extracting spatio-temporal dependencies as contextual conditions for spatio-temporal
data imputation. However, as analyzed in the introduction, existing studies underestimate the
importance of accurately modeling the residual term for missing data imputation.
For the time series imputation methods in frequency domain, mvLSWimpute [51] utilizes wavelet
transforms to guide imputation, APDNet [ 60] uses the Fourier Temporal and Fourier Variable
Interaction modules to model dependencies. In addition, the frequency domain time series forecasting
methods FEDformer [58], FreTS [55] can also be applied to imputation task. However, they did not
consider using frequency domain information to model the missing data’s residual terms accurately,
which is critical for boosting the overall imputation performance.
In contrast, our FGTI captures high-frequency information and dominant-frequency information to
get a more accurate modeling of the residual term, while assisting in describing trend and seasonal
terms.
3 Frequency-aware Generative Models
In this paper, we focus on the incomplete multivariate time series imputation problem. The input
multivariate time series X = ( X1, . . . ,XD) ∈ RD×L is a set of D attribute values recorded at
L consecutive timestamps, where each attribute series Xd ∈ RL. Each element xij in X is the
observation of the i-th attribute at the j-th timestamp, which is probably missing. We use the binary
mask matrix M ∈ {0, 1}D×L to represent the missing status of observations in X, where mij = 1 in
M denotes that xij is complete, otherwise xij = 0. In our context, we refer to the imputation target
as ˆX. During the training of the imputation model, we choose some observations as the imputation
target. When we impute missing values, we treat all the missing values as the imputation target.
In Figure 1, it is evident that the main obstacle to improving multivariate time series imputation is the
residual term. Considering a recognized fact that the residual term often contains high-frequency
components from the perspective of Fourier analysis [46; 58; 26], introducing prior knowledge of
frequency-domain information can be a feasible approach to enhancing model performance.
As a class of superior data imputation models, deep generative models treat the time series imputation
task as calculating the conditional imputation target probability distribution q( ˆX0|C), where q( ˆX0)
is the clean data distribution and existing deep generative imputation models [ 56; 29; 44] use the
observed values X in the time-domain as the condition C for probability distribution calculation.
Note that we denote the complete or the imputed imputation target as the clean imputation target ˆX0.
However, frequency principal [ 38; 43] reveals that deep models cannot generalize well to high-
frequency information. As a result, it may not accurately impute the residual term [13] inherent in
the time series dataset that cannot be trivialized in the imputation task [28].
To tackle the above challenge, we incorporate frequency-domain information into condition C to
enhance the performance of generative models. Our FGTI implements the condition C that contains
time-domain observation condition XC, as well as the frequency-domain conditions CH and CD.
3
