
=== PAGE 1 ===
SAITS: S ELF -ATTENTION -BASED IMPUTATION FOR TIME
SERIES ∗
A PREPRINT
Wenjie Du †
Concordia University
Montréal, Canada
wenjay.du@gmail.com
David Cote
Ciena Corporation
Ottawa, Canada
dcote@ciena.com
Yan Liu
Concordia University
Montréal, Canada
yan.liu@concordia.ca
July 6, 2023
ABSTRACT
Missing data in time series is a pervasive problem that puts obstacles in the way of advanced analysis.
A popular solution is imputation, where the fundamental challenge is to determine what values should
be filled in. This paper proposes SAITS, a novel method based on the self-attention mechanism for
missing value imputation in multivariate time series. Trained by a joint-optimization approach, SAITS
learns missing values from a weighted combination of two diagonally-masked self-attention (DMSA)
blocks. DMSA explicitly captures both the temporal dependencies and feature correlations between
time steps, which improves imputation accuracy and training speed. Meanwhile, the weighted-
combination design enables SAITS to dynamically assign weights to the learned representations
from two DMSA blocks according to the attention map and the missingness information. Extensive
experiments quantitatively and qualitatively demonstrate that SAITS outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods on the time-series imputation task efficiently and reveal SAITS’ potential to improve the
learning performance of pattern recognition models on incomplete time-series data from the real
world. The code is open source on GitHub at https://github.com/WenjieDu/SAITS.
Keywords Time Series · Missing Values · Imputation Model · Self-Attention · Neural Network
1 Introduction
Multivariate time-series data is ubiquitous in many application domains, for instance, transportation, economics,
healthcare, and meteorology. State-of-the-art (SOTA) pattern recognition methods can well handle various time-
series analysis tasks on complete datasets. However, due to all kinds of reasons, including failure of collection
sensors, communication error, and unexpected malfunction, missing values are common to see in time series from the
real-world environment, for example, patient health measurement [1], air-quality monitoring [2], telecommunication
networking [3], and educational systems [4]. They impair the interpretability of data and pose challenges for advanced
analysis and pattern recognition tasks, for instance, classification and clustering. To learn with such incomplete time
series, thinking ahead of how to deal with missing parts before modeling is an inevitable step.
Traditional missing value processing methods fall into two categories. One is deletion, which removes samples
or features that are partially observed. However, deletion makes data incomplete and can yield biased parameter
estimates [5]. The other one is data imputation that estimates missing data from observed values [6]. There are two main
advantages to imputation over deletion [7]: (1). Deletion introduces bias, while correctly specified imputation estimates
are unbiased [8]; (2). Partially observed data may still be informative and helpful to the analysis. Nevertheless, the
problem of imputation is what values should be filled in. Amounts of prior work are proposed to solve this problem with
statistics and machine learning methods [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. However, most of them require strong assumptions
on missing data [16], for example, linear regression [10], mean/median averaging and k-nearest neighbors [11]. Such
∗Published in the journal Expert Systems with Applications. Its DOI link:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.119619
†Work was done during a machine-learning research internship at Ciena, co-funded by Mitacs.
arXiv:2202.08516v5  [cs.LG]  5 Jul 2023

=== PAGE 2 ===
A PREPRINT - J ULY 6, 2023
assumptions may introduce a strong bias that influences the outcome of the analysis. Recently, much literature utilizes
deep learning to solve this imputation problem and achieves SOTA results. Non-time series imputation models, which
are not in the scope of this paper, can be referred to [ 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. A more detailed description of
time-series imputation models is presented in Section 2, including [16, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34].
Missing values can be characterized into three types: (1). Missing completely at random (MCAR), missing values are
independent of any other values; (2). Missing at random (MAR), missing values depend only on observed values; (3).
Missing not at random (MNAR), missing values depend on both observed and unobserved values [35, 36]. This work
focuses on the MCAR case, as is standard in most of literature in the field of imputation. We uniformly sample values
to be missing independently and introduce them as artificial missingness to evaluate all imputation methods used in this
paper.
The self-attention mechanism is now widely applied, whereas its application on time-series imputation is still limited.
Previous SOTA time-series imputation models are mostly based on recurrent neural networks (RNN), such as [ 16,
25, 27, 28, 26]. Among them, the methods [ 16, 25, 27, 28] are autoregressive models that are highly susceptible to
compounding errors [37, 26]. Although the work [26] is not autoregressive, the multi-resolution imputation algorithm it
proposed is made up of a loop, which can greatly slow the imputation speed. The self-attention mechanism, which is
non-autoregressive and can overcome RNNs’ drawbacks of slow speed and memory constraints, can avoid compounding
error and be helpful to achieve better imputation quality and faster speed. This paper proposes a novel model called
SAITS (Self-Attention-based Imputation for Time Series) to learn missing values by a joint-optimization training
approach of imputation and reconstruction. Particularly, our contributions in this work are summarized as the following:
I. We design a joint-optimization training approach of imputation and reconstruction for self-attention models
to perform missing value imputation for multivariate time series. Transformer trained by this approach
outperforms SOTA methods.
II. We design a model called SAITS that consists of a weighted combination of two diagonally-masked self-
attention (DMSA) blocks, which emancipates SAITS from RNN and enables it to capture temporal dependen-
cies and feature correlations between time steps explicitly.
III. We conduct adequate experiments and ablation studies on four real-world public datasets to quantitatively
and qualitatively evaluate our methodology and justify its design. The experimental results do not only prove
that SAITS achieves the new SOTA position for the imputation accuracy, but also show SAITS’ potential of
facilitating pattern recognition models to learn with partially-observed time series from the real world.
The rest of this work is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related literature. Section 3 introduces our
joint-optimization training approach and the SAITS model. Experiments and conclusions are presented in Section 4
and 5, respectively.
2 Related Work
We review the prior related work of time-series imputation in the following four categories:
RNN-based Che et al. [38] propose GRU-D, a gated recurrent unit (GRU) variant, to handle missing data in time
series classification problems. The concept of time decay on the last observation is firstly proposed by [ 38] and
continues to be used in [16, 25, 27, 28]. M-RNN [25] and BRITS [16] impute missing values according to hidden states
from bidirectional RNN. However, M-RNN treats missing values as constants, while BRITS treats missing values as
variables of the RNN graph. Furthermore, BRITS takes correlations among features into consideration while M-RNN
does not.
GAN-based Models in [ 27, 28, 26] are also RNN-based. However, due to they adopt the generative adversarial
network (GAN) structure, they are listed separately as GAN-based. Luo et al. [27] propose GRUI (GRU for Imputation)
to model temporal information of incomplete time series. Both the generator and the discriminator in their GAN
model are based on GRUI. Moreover, based on [27], Luo et al. [28] propose E2GAN, which is an end-to-end method,
comparing to the method in [ 27] having two stages. E 2GAN adopts an auto-encoder based on GRUI to form its
generator to ease the difficulty of model training and improve imputation performance. Liu et al. [ 26] propose a
non-autoregressive model called NAOMI for spatiotemporal sequence imputation, which consists of a bidirectional
encoder and a multiresolution decoder. NAOMI is further enhanced by adversarial training.
All the above RNN-based imputation models are susceptible to the recurrent network structure. They are time-consuming
and have memory constraints, which make it hard for them to handle long-term dependency in time series, especially
when the number of time steps in data samples is big. Apart from these disadvantages, most of these models are
autoregressive that leads to the problem which is called compounding error in the field of time-series analysis [ 37].
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
A PREPRINT - J ULY 6, 2023
Although NAOMI alleviates this problem, its imputation algorithm consists of a loop, which can greatly slow the
imputation speed together with its RNN structure. In addition, RNN models are usually unidirectional [ 38, 27, 28].
Even the models in [16, 25, 26] leverage bidirectional RNN to further improve the performance. Their final imputation
results come from the average of two RNN models working on two directions (forward and backward) separately. As a
result, these models are not deeply bidirectional [39].
V AE-based Inspired by GPPV AE [40] and the non-time-series imputation model HI-V AE [22], Fortuin et al. [29]
propose GP-V AE, a variational auto-encoder (V AE) architecture for time series imputation with a Gaussian process
(GP) prior in the latent space. The GP-prior is used to help embed the data into a smoother and more explainable
representation. L-V AE [30] uses an additive multi-output GP-prior to accommodate auxiliary covariate information other
than time. To support sparse GP approximations based on inducing points and handle missing values in spatiotemporal
datasets, Ashman et al. [31] propose SGP-V AE.
The GAN-based and V AE-based models are all generative ones, and they are difficult to train [23]. Particularly, GAN
models suffer from the problems of non-convergence and mode collapse due to their loss formulation [41]. V AE models
tend to involve latent variables used in the sampling and imputation, while they often do not correspond to concrete
structures or distributions of the data, and this can make it difficult to interpret the imputation process for further
understanding [23].
Self-Attention-based Ma et al. [32] apply cross-dimensional self-attention (CDSA) jointly from three dimensions
(time, location, and measurement) to impute missing values in geo-tagged data, namely spatiotemporal datasets. Bansal
et al. [33] propose DeepMVI for missing value imputation in multidimensional time-series data. Their model includes a
Transformer with a convolutional window feature and a kernel regression. Shan et al. [34] propose NRTSI, a time-series
imputation approach treating time series as a set of (time, data) tuples. Such a design makes NRTSI applicable to
irregularly-sampled time series. The method directly uses a Transformer encoder for modeling and achieves SOTA
performance in their work. Such above prior literature explores applying self-attention in the field of time-series
imputation. However, CDSA [32] is specifically designed for spatiotemporal data rather than general time series, and
both CDSA and DeepMVI [ 33] are not open-source, which makes it hard for other researchers to reproduce their
methods and results. Regarding NRTSI [ 34], its algorithm design consists of two nested loops, which weaken the
advantage of self-attention that is parallelly computational. Even worse, such loops can lead NRTSI to slow processing.
Related work of self-attention-based models for time-series imputation is not much. There are some non-time series
imputation models based on self-attention, such as AimNet [23] and MAIN [24].
3 Methodology
Our methodology is made up of two parts: (1). the joint-optimization training approach of imputation and reconstruction;
(2). the SAITS model, a weighted combination of two DMSA blocks.
3.1 Joint-optimization Training Approach
A general illustration of the joint-optimization approach is shown in Figure 1. We are going to first give the definition
of multivariate time series bearing missing data, then introduce the two learning objectives in detail.
3.1.1 Definition of Multivariate Time-Series with Missing Values
Given a collection of multivariate time series with T time steps and D dimensions, it is denoted as X =
{x1, x2, ..., xt, ..., xT } ∈ RT ×D, where the t-th step xt = {x1
t , x2
t , ..., xd
t , ..., xD
t } ∈ R1×D and each value in it
could be missing. Accordingly, X d
t represents the d-th dimension variable of the t-th step in X. To represent the
missing variables in X, the missing mask vector M ∈ RT ×D is introduced, where
M d
t =

1 if X d
t is observed
0 if X d
t is missing
3.1.2 Two Learning Tasks
To well train self-attention-based imputation models on the above defined multivariate time series with missing values,
a joint-optimization training approach of imputation and reconstruction is designed. Here "imputation" is defined as the
process in which the model fills the missing part in the given samples from null, and "reconstruction" means the model
restores the observed values as exactly as possible after its processing. This joint-optimization approach consists of
3
