
=== PAGE 1 ===
Learning to Reconstruct Missing Data from
Spatiotemporal Graphs with Sparse Observations
Ivan Marisca∗
1The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA,
Università della Svizzera italiana
ivan.marisca@usi.ch
Andrea Cini∗
1The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA,
Università della Svizzera italiana
andrea.cini@usi.ch
Cesare Alippi
1The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA,
Università della Svizzera italiana
2Politecnico di Milano
cesare.alippi@usi.ch
Abstract
Modeling multivariate time series as temporal signals over a (possibly dynamic)
graph is an effective representational framework that allows for developing models
for time series analysis. In fact, discrete sequences of graphs can be processed by
autoregressive graph neural networks to recursively learn representations at each
discrete point in time and space. Spatiotemporal graphs are often highly sparse,
with time series characterized by multiple, concurrent, and long sequences of
missing data, e.g., due to the unreliable underlying sensor network. In this context,
autoregressive models can be brittle and exhibit unstable learning dynamics. The
objective of this paper is, then, to tackle the problem of learning effective models
to reconstruct, i.e., impute, missing data points by conditioning the reconstruction
only on the available observations. In particular, we propose a novel class of
attention-based architectures that, given a set of highly sparse discrete observations,
learn a representation for points in time and space by exploiting a spatiotemporal
propagation architecture aligned with the imputation task. Representations are
trained end-to-end to reconstruct observations w.r.t. the corresponding sensor and its
neighboring nodes. Compared to the state of the art, our model handles sparse data
without propagating prediction errors or requiring a bidirectional model to encode
forward and backward time dependencies. Empirical results on representative
benchmarks show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
1 Introduction
Exploiting structure – both temporal and spatial – is arguably the key ingredient for the success of
modern deep learning architectures and models. Structure and invariances allow imposing inductive
biases to learning systems that act as strong regularizations, thus limiting the space of possible models
to the most plausible ones and, consequently, greatly reducing sample complexity. This is the case
with spatiotemporal graph neural networks (STGNNs) [ 1–3] which learn to process multivariate
time series while taking into account underlying space and time dependencies by encoding structural
spatiotemporal inductive biases in their architectures. In particular, graphs are used to model the
presence of spatial relationships which can be thought of as soft functional dependencies existing
∗Equal contribution.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
arXiv:2205.13479v2  [cs.LG]  10 Oct 2022

=== PAGE 2 ===
among the sensors generating the time series [4]. However, even when spatiotemporal relationships
are present, available data are almost always incomplete and irregularly sampled both spatially and
temporally. This is deﬁnitely true for data coming from real sensor networks (SNs), where the
presence of missing data is a phenomenon inherent to any data acquisition or communication process.
In this case, a common approach is to reconstruct missing time series observations with simple
interpolation strategies before proceeding with the downstream task. However, arguably, this induces
a bias in the inference procedure, possibly made even worse by the strong regularization imposed on
the model. More advanced methods deal with missing data by autoregressively replacing missing
observations with predicted ones, eventually using bidirectional architectures [5, 6] to exploit both
forward and backward temporal dependencies. To account also for spatial dependencies, Cini et al.
[4] introduced a method, named GRIN, combining a bidirectional autoregressive architecture with
message passing graph neural networks [7–10] for spatiotemporal imputation. Despite being the state
of the art in imputation, GRIN suffers from the error propagation typical of autoregressive models
that bootstrap future inferences from their own predictions. In fact, we argue that the propagation of
imputed (biased) values through space and time combined with noisy observations might exacerbate
error accumulation in highly sparse data and drive the hidden state of GRIN-like models to possibly
drift away. In this paper, we aim at tackling this problem by designing an architecture based on a novel
attention mechanism that takes spatiotemporal sparsity into account while learning representations
and imputing missing values.
Attention-based models allow distributed representations to emerge by letting each discrete element –
representing an entity or point within a structured environment – interact with each other. In fact, these
mechanisms for propagating information through structures have been recently linked to collective
intelligence [11]. In our context, each token, represented as a node in a sequence of graphs, represents
a point in space and time. A trivial way to account for sparsity in this setting is to constrain the
attention coefﬁcients of time steps corresponding to missing data to be zero or simply to add an
auxiliary token to indicate missing observations; basically, the resulting reconstruction model would
behave similarly to a denoising autoencoder, in the same spirit of BERT-like encoders popular
in natural language processing [ 12]. Conversely, we propose a novel architecture exploiting an
inter-node sparse spatiotemporal attention mechanism within the neural message-passing framework.
In particular, we seek to design an architecture where each processing stage is aligned with the
task of reconstructing missing spatiotemporal observations. Our model can be seen as a learned,
self-organizing, spatiotemporal propagation process that, as we will motivate throughout the paper, is
more apt to the purpose of missing data reconstruction than standard encoder-decoder architectures.
In fact, compared with the alternatives discussed so far, our method exploits the aforementioned
propagation process to learn a predictive representation for each missing observation by relying
only on observed values propagated through the spatiotemporal structure. This approach achieves
the twofold objective of avoiding propagating biased representation – typical in the autoregressive
framework – and reconstructing observations at arbitrary nodes in the sensor network. In summary,
our main contributions are as follows.
1. We introduce a sparse spatiotemporal attention mechanism to learn, from sparse data,
representations localized in time and space.
2. We design a novel graph neural network architecture based on the aforementioned spatiotem-
poral attention mechanism and equipped with inductive biases that make the model tailored
for the multivariate time series imputation task.
3. We empirically assess the proposed method, showing how it overcomes the limits of existing
approaches, particularly in settings with highly sparse data.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we discuss related works and contrast them with ours.
We formulate the problem of multivariate time series imputation in the context of spatiotemporal
graphs in Section 3, and present our approach in Section 4 by providing an in-depth discussion of
motivations, design choices, as well as methodological and technical issues. Finally, in Section 5,
we report the empirical results on several relevant benchmarks. Conclusions and future works are
discussed in Section 6.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
2 Related works
Multivariate time series imputation is a core task in time series analysis. Besides standard statistical
approaches based on linear autoregressive models [13–15] or interpolation [16], methods based on
matrix factorization are widely popular [17] and can also incorporate temporal [18] and graph-side
information [19]. Deep learning methods are also commonly used in this regard. In particular, deep
autoregressive models based on recurrent neural networkss (RNNs) are currently among the most
widely adopted methods [20, 5, 6, 21]. In this direction, BRITS [6] is archetypal of several related
works which exploit bidirectional RNNs to perform imputation. Notably, differently from a denoising
autoencoder, BRITS uses one-step-ahead forecasting as a surrogate task to learn an imputation model
while using a simple linear regression layer to incorporate spatial information. Several approaches in
the literature, then, rely on generative adversarial neural networks [22] – often paired with RNNs – to
generate imputed subsequences by matching the underlying data distribution [23, 24, 21]. Recently,
several attention-based imputation techniques have also been proposed [25–27], however, none of
these explicitly account for spatial dependencies within the graph processing framework and overlook
the spatial dimension of the problem. Other works, instead, address this problem in the context
of continuous-time models [28]. Huang et al. [29], in particular, exploit graph representations to
model spatial dynamics. The limits of deep autoregressive approaches in data reconstruction have
also been tackled by using hierarchical imputation methods [ 30, 31]. More related to our work,
GRIN [4] uses a bidirectional graph RNN, paired with a message passing spatial decoder, to impute
time series based on spatiotemporal dependencies. Other graph-based architectures have been used
in application-speciﬁc settings, such as trafﬁc data [32, 33] and load proﬁles from smart grids [34].
While GRIN achieves remarkable performance, we argue that spatial regularization might not be
enough to prevent error compounding in the states of the recurrent graph network.
The attention mechanism has been exploited in several contexts within the graph deep learning
literature, in particular in anisotropic graph convolutional ﬁlters [35–38]. Among STGNNs, attention-
based architectures have been exploited in time series forecasting [ 37, 39–41]. In particular, Tra-
verseNet [41] is specially related to our work, since it relies on spatiotemporal autoregressive attention
to compute messages exchanged between nodes. One striking example of attention being used suc-
cessfully to process incomplete data is in pretraining routines for representation learning in natural
language processing [12, 42]. Finally, graph neural networks are also popular for reconstructing
missing features in static graphs [43–45].
3 Preliminaries
We model multivariate spatiotemporal time series as observations coming from a SNs. In a SN every
i-th node, i.e., sensor, acquires a d-dimensional xi
t∈ Rd observation at each t-th time step. We
denote by Xt∈ RNt×d the matrix collecting the measurements ofNt sensors at time stept, with
Xt:t+T being the sequence ofT measurements collected in the time interval [t,t +T ). We model
functional relationships among the sensors as graph edges. Relationships can be often inferred from
available side information, e.g., one can extract a graph from the position of each sensor and their
reciprocal physical proximity or the structure of the physical system where sensors are placed. In other
cases instead, functional dependencies can be inferred directly from data by exploiting some afﬁnity
score (e.g., Pearson correlation, Granger causality [46], correntropy [47], etc.), or more advanced
techniques (e.g., graph learning methods [48]). We model the extracted relational information with a
weighted, possibly asymmetric adjacency matrix At∈ RNt×Nt, in which each nonzero entryai,j
t
indicates the weight of the edge going from the i-th node to the j-th. While our framework can
account for dynamic relationships, we mostly focus on settings where the topology is static, i.e.,
At = A andNt =N. Finally, we assume to have available sensor-level covariates Qt∈ RN×dq
that act as spatiotemporal coordinates to localize a point in time and space (e.g., date/time features
and geographic location). Note that coordinates qi
t are assumed available for each node at each time
step; in section 4 we discuss how Qt can be learned as a spatiotemporal positional encoding. We then
model observations as a discrete sequence of spatiotemporal graphs, where each graph is a triplet
Gt =⟨Xt, Qt, A⟩. Note that, in general, we indicate with capital letters network-level attributes,
while we use the lowercase for the sensor level.
As already mentioned, observations might be incomplete due to faults, partial observability, and costs
of the data acquisition process. We model data availability with a binary mask mi
t∈{ 0, 1} which is
3
