
=== PAGE 1 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
TIMES NET: T EMPORAL 2D-VARIATION MODELING
FOR GENERAL TIME SERIES ANALYSIS
Haixu Wu∗, Tengge Hu∗, Y ong Liu∗, Hang Zhou, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long B
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{whx20,liuyong21,htg21,h-zhou18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Time series analysis is of immense importance in extensive applications, such as
weather forecasting, anomaly detection, and action recognition. This paper focuses
on temporal variation modeling, which is the common key problem of extensive
analysis tasks. Previous methods attempt to accomplish this directly from the 1D
time series, which is extremely challenging due to the intricate temporal patterns.
Based on the observation of multi-periodicity in time series, we ravel out the com-
plex temporal variations into the multiple intraperiod- and interperiod-variations.
To tackle the limitations of 1D time series in representation capability, we extend
the analysis of temporal variations into the 2D space by transforming the 1D time
series into a set of 2D tensors based on multiple periods. This transformation can
embed the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations into the columns and rows of
the 2D tensors respectively, making the 2D-variations to be easily modeled by 2D
kernels. Technically, we propose the TimesNet with TimesBlock as a task-general
backbone for time series analysis. TimesBlock can discover the multi-periodicity
adaptively and extract the complex temporal variations from transformed 2D ten-
sors by a parameter-efﬁcient inception block. Our proposed TimesNet achieves
consistent state-of-the-art in ﬁve mainstream time series analysis tasks, including
short- and long-term forecasting, imputation, classiﬁcation, and anomaly detection.
Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/TimesNet.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Time series analysis is widely used in extensive real-world applications, such as the forecasting of
meteorological factors for weather prediction (Wu et al., 2021), imputation of missing data for data
mining (Friedman, 1962), anomaly detection of monitoring data for industrial maintenance (Xu et al.,
2021) and classiﬁcation of trajectories for action recognition (Franceschi et al., 2019). Because of its
immense practical value, time series analysis has received great interest (Lim & Zohren, 2021).
Different from other types of sequential data, such as language or video, time series is recorded
continuously and each time point only saves some scalars. Since one single time point usually cannot
provide sufﬁcient semantic information for analysis, many works focus on the temporal variation,
which is more informative and can reﬂect the inherent properties of time series, such as the continuity,
periodicity, trend and etc. However, the variations of real-world time series always involve intricate
temporal patterns, where multiple variations (e.g. rising, falling, ﬂuctuation and etc.) mix and overlap
with each other, making the temporal variation modeling extremely challenging.
Especially in the deep learning communities, beneﬁting from the powerful non-linear modeling
capacity of deep models, many works have been proposed to capture the complex temporal variations
in real-world time series. One category of methods adopts recurrent neural networks (RNN) to
model the successive time points based on the Markov assumption (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Lai et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2020). However, these methods usually fail in capturing the long-
term dependencies and their efﬁciencies suffer from the sequential computation paradigm. Another
category of methods utilizes the convolutional neural network along the temporal dimension (TCN)
∗Equal Contribution
1
arXiv:2210.02186v3  [cs.LG]  12 Apr 2023

=== PAGE 2 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Period 3
Time
Frequency
Value
Amplitude
Period 1
Period 2…
Reshaped
Time
Series
ҁ҂
FFT for Periods Reshape to 2D Structure
Period 1
Period 2
Period 1
Length
Period 2
Length
…
Reshaped
Time
Series
ҁ҂
IntraperiodInterperiod
Periodicity
Continuity
Time
Value
Period 2
Period 1
ŏ
Intraperiod-
variation
Interperiod-variation
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Interperiod-variation
Intraperiod-variation
Period 3
Time
Value
Period 2
Period 1
ŏ
Intraperiod-
variation
Interperiod-variation
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Interperiod-variation
Intraperiod-variation
Time points at the same 
phase of different periods
ŏ
ŏ
Figure 1: Multi-periodicity and temporal 2D-variation of time series. Each period involves the
intraperiod-variation and interperiod-variation. We transform the original 1D time series into a set of
2D tensors based on multiple periods, which can unify the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations.
to extract the variation information (Franceschi et al., 2019; He & Zhao, 2019). Also, because of the
locality property of the one-dimension convolution kernels, they can only model the variations among
adjacent time points, thereby still failing in long-term dependencies. Recently, Transformers with
attention mechanism have been widely used in sequential modeling (Brown et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021b). In time series analysis, many Transformer-based models adopt the
attention mechanism or its variants to capture the pair-wise temporal dependencies among time points
(Li et al., 2019; Kitaev et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021; 2022). But it is hard for attention mechanism
to ﬁnd out reliable dependencies directly from scattered time points, since the temporal dependencies
can be obscured deeply in intricate temporal patterns (Wu et al., 2021).
In this paper, to tackle the intricate temporal variations, we analyze the time series from a new
dimension of multi-periodicity. Firstly, we observe that real-world time series usually present
multi-periodicity, such as daily and yearly variations for weather observations, weekly and quarterly
variations for electricity consumption. These multiple periods overlap and interact with each other,
making the variation modeling intractable. Secondly, for each period, we ﬁnd out that the variation of
each time point is not only affected by the temporal pattern of its adjacent area but also highly related
to the variations of its adjacent periods. For clearness, we name these two types of temporal variations
as intraperiod-variation and interperiod-variation respectively. The former indicates short-term
temporal patterns within a period. The latter can reﬂect long-term trends of consecutive different
periods. Note that for the time series without clear periodicity, the variations will be dominated by
the intraperiod-variation and is equivalent to the ones with inﬁnite period length.
Since different periods will lead to different intraperiod- and interperiod-variations, the multi-
periodicity can naturally derive a modular architecture for temporal variation modeling, where
we can capture the variations derived by a certain period in one module. Besides, this design makes
the intricate temporal patterns disentangled, beneﬁting the temporal variation modeling. However,
it is notable that the 1D time series is hard to explicitly present two different types of variations
simultaneously. To tackle this obstacle, we extend the analysis of temporal variations into the 2D
space. Concretely, as shown in Figure 1, we can reshape the 1D time series into a 2D tensor, where
each column contains the time points within a period and each row involves the time points at the
same phase among different periods. Thus, by transforming 1D time series into a set of 2D tensors,
we can break the bottleneck of representation capability in the original 1D space and successfully
unify the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations in 2D space, obtaining the temporal 2D-variations.
Technically, based on above motivations, we go beyond previous backbones and propose theTimesNet
as a new task-general model for time series analysis. Empowering by TimesBlock, TimesNet can
discover the multi-periodicity of time series and capture the corresponding temporal variations in a
modular architecture. Concretely, TimesBlock can adaptively transform the 1D time series into a set
of 2D tensors based on learned periods and further capture intraperiod- and interperiod-variations
in the 2D space by a parameter-efﬁcient inception block. Experimentally, TimesNet achieves the
consistent state-of-the-art in ﬁve mainstream analysis tasks, including short- and long-term forecasting,
imputation, classiﬁcation and anomaly detection. Our contributions are summarized in three folds:
• Motivated by multi-periodicity and complex interactions within and between periods, we
ﬁnd out a modular way for temporal variation modeling. By transforming the 1D time series
into 2D space, we can present the intraperiod- and interperiod-variations simultaneously.
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
• We propose the TimesNet with TimesBlock to discover multiple periods and capture tempo-
ral 2D-variations from transformed 2D tensors by a parameter-efﬁcient inception block.
• As a task-general foundation model, TimesNet achieves the consistent state-of-the-art in ﬁve
mainstream time series analysis tasks. Detailed and insightful visualizations are included.
2 R ELATED WORK
As a key problem of time series analysis, temporal variation modeling has been well explored.
Many classical methods assume that the temporal variations follow the pre-deﬁned patterns, such as
ARIMA (Anderson & Kendall, 1976), Holt-Winter (Hyndman & Athanasopoulos, 2018) and Prophet
(Taylor & Letham, 2018). However, the variations of real-world time series are usually too complex
to be covered by pre-deﬁned patterns, limiting the practical applicability of these classical methods.
In recent years, many deep models have been proposed for temporal modeling, such as MLP, TCN,
RNN-based models (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Lai et al., 2018; Franceschi et al., 2019).
Technically, MLP-based methods (Oreshkin et al., 2019; Challu et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2022) adopt the MLP along the temporal dimension and encode the temporal dependencies
into the ﬁxed parameter of MLP layers. The TCN-based (2019) methods capture the temporal
variations by convolutional kernels that slide along the temporal dimension. The RNN-based methods
(Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Lai et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2022) utilize the recurrent structure and
capture temporal variations implicitly by state transitions among time steps. Note that none of these
methods consider the temporal 2D-variations derived by periodicity, which is proposed in this paper.
Besides, Transformers have shown great performance in time series forecasting (Zhou et al., 2021;
Liu et al., 2021a; Wu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022). With attention mechanism, they can discover the
temporal dependencies among time points. Especially, Wu et al. present the Autoformer with Auto-
Correlation mechanism to capture the series-wise temporal dependencies based on the learned periods.
In addition, to tackle the intricate temporal patterns, Autoformer also presents a deep decomposition
architecture to obtain the seasonal and trend parts of input series. Afterward, FEDformer (Zhou
et al., 2022) employs the mixture-of-expert design to enhance the seasonal-trend decomposition and
presents a sparse attention within the frequency domain. Unlike previous methods, we ravel out the
intricate temporal patterns by exploring the multi-periodicity of time series and capture the temporal
2D-variations in 2D space by well-acknowledged computer vision backbones for the ﬁrst time.
It is also notable that, different from previous methods, we no longer limit to a speciﬁc analysis task
and attempt to propose a task-general foundation model for time series analysis.
3 T IMES NET
As aforementioned, based on the multi-periodicity of time series, we propose the TimesNet with a
modular architecture to capture the temporal patterns derived from different periods. For each period,
to capture the corresponding intraperiod- and interperiod-variations, we design a TimesBlock within
the TimesNet, which can transform the 1D time series into 2D space and simultaneously model the
two types of variations by a parameter-efﬁcient inception block.
3.1 T RANSFORM 1D- VARIATIONS INTO 2D- VARIATIONS
As shown in Figure 1, each time point involves two types of temporal variations with its adjacent area
and with the same phase among different periods simultaneously, namelyintraperiod- and interperiod-
variations. However, this original 1D structure of time series can only present the variations among
adjacent time points. To tackle this limitation, we explore the two-dimension structure for temporal
variations, which can explicitly present variations within and between periods, thereby with more
advantages in representation capability and beneﬁting the subsequent representation learning.
Concretely, for the length-T time series withC recorded variates, the original 1D organization is
X1D∈ RT×C. To represent the interperiod-variation, we need to discover periods ﬁrst. Technically,
we analyze the time series in the frequency domain by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) as follows:
A = Avg
(
Amp
(
FFT(X1D)
))
,{f1,··· ,f k} = arg Topk
f∗∈{1,··· ,[ T
2 ]}
(A), pi =
⌈T
fi
⌉
,i∈{ 1,··· ,k}.
(1)
3
